---
layout: default
title: "bio_hansel: SNV Subtyping"
search_title: "bio_hansel: SNV Subtyping"
description: "A tutorial on how to subtype whole-genome sequencing data with bio_hansel"
---

Subtyping *Salmonella* data with bio_hansel
============================================
This is a quick tutorial on how to use IRIDA to analyze data with the bio_hansel pipeline.


Tutorial Data
=============

The data for this tutorial comes from the EMBL-EBI ENA sequencing run sample [SRR1203042] (please download the [forward reads] and [reverse reads]). 

It is assumed the [forward reads] and [reverse reads] in `fastq.gz` format have been uploaded into an appropriate sample as described in the [Web Upload Tutorial]. 


Adding Samples to the Cart
==========================

Before a pipeline can be run a set of samples and sequence read data must be selected and added to the cart. For this tutorial please select the single sample and click the **Add to Cart** button.

![add-to-cart]

Once the desired samples have been added to the cart, click the **Cart** button at the top navigation bar:

![cart-button]


Selecting a Pipeline
====================

Once inside the cart, the **Select a Pipeline** button can be used to select a pipeline to run on the selected samples.

For this tutorial, we will select the **bio_hansel Pipeline**: 
![pipeline-select]


Selecting Parameters
====================

Once the pipeline is selected, the next page provides an overview of all the input files, as well as the option to modify parameters. You will be required to **select a SNV subtyping scheme** to use for your analysis.

![biohansel-pipeline-page]

Please select the **Salmonella Heidelberg SNV Subtyping Scheme**.

![biohansel-pipeline-params]

You can leave the other parameters unmodified. Please use the **Ready to Launch?** button to start the pipeline.

![launch-button]

Once the button is selected you should see a screen showing that your pipeline has been launched.

![pipeline-launched]

Monitoring Pipeline Status
==========================

To monitor the status of the launched pipeline, please select the **Analysis > Your Analyses** menu or click the **Let's see how this pipeline is doing** button.

![view-your-analyses]

This will bring you to a page where you can monitor the status of each launched workflow.

![monitor-analyses]

Clicking the pipeline name will bring you to a page for that analysis pipeline. It will take a while for the bio_hansel analysis pipeline to complete. Along the top of the page you can check the current step of the analysis and at the bottom of the **Details** tab you can select if you would like to receive an email upon pipeline completion. The email option is only available if the analysis is not in `COMPLETED` or `ERROR` state.

![analysis-in-progress]

Viewing Individual Sample Results
=================================

Once the pipeline is complete, you will be able to view the `bio_hansel` pipeline results.

![biohansel-results]

You can view the `bio_hansel` analysis output files in tabular or json view by selecting the Output File Preview Tab. Note that not all files have an available preview and as such are not displayed in the Output File Preview but are downloaded when selecting the `Download All Files` button.

![biohansel-output-files]

To download individual files select the **...** next to the Download All Files and select the file to download.

![biohansel-download-individual-files]

To download al the files generated by the analysis, please select the **Download All Files** button.

![biohansel-download-all-files]

You can view the detailed `bio_hansel` match results in a tabular view:

![biohansel-match-results]


Viewing Results For Multiple Samples
====================================

If you had checked the **Save bio_hansel results to Project Line List Metadata** checkbox on the `bio_hansel` pipeline launch page, you will be able to view the results of your analyses in the **Line List** table on the **Project** page:

![biohansel-linelist]

Note that the results can also be saved to the Project Line List Metadata from the **Settings** > **Manage Results** tab within your analysis.

![biohansel-share-save-results]

Interpreting the Results
========================

For more information on interpreting your `bio_hansel` results, please see:

- the [IRIDA bio_hansel Documentation][docs] or 
- the [bio_hansel GitHub] page.


Viewing Provenance Information
==============================

To view the pipeline provenance information, please select the **Provenance** tab.

![biohansel-provenance]

The provenance is displayed on a per file basis. Clicking on `bio_hansel_tech-results.json` file will display it's provenance. Expanding each tool will display the parameters that the tool was executed with.

![biohansel-provenance-tools]


Viewing Pipeline Details
========================

To view analysis details, please select the **Settings** tab. From here you can view the analysis name, analysis description, analysis id, pipeline and pipeline version used by the analysis, analysis priority, when the analysis was created, and duration of the analysis.

![biohansel-settings]

To edit an analysis name, please select the Pencil icon next to the analysis name. Once you have edited the analysis name, pressing the `ENTER` key on your keyboard or clicking anywhere outside of the text box will update the name. To cancel editing a name you can either hit the `ESC` key on your keyboard or if the name has not been changed you can also click anywhere outside of the text box.

![biohansel-settings-edit-name]

To view samples used by the analysis, please select the **Samples** tab.

![biohansel-settings-samples]

To share analysis results with other projects and/or save results back to samples, please select the **Manage Results** tab.

![biohansel-settings-share]

To delete an analysis, please select the **Delete Analysis** tab.

![biohansel-settings-delete]


[add-to-cart]: images/add-to-cart.png
[analysis-in-progress]: images/analysis-in-progress.png
[bio_hansel GitHub]: https://github.com/phac-nml/bio_hansel
[biohansel-download-all-files]: images/biohansel-download-all-files.png
[biohansel-download-individual-files]: images/biohansel-download-individual-files.png
[biohansel-linelist]: images/biohansel-linelist.png
[biohansel-match-results]: images/biohansel-output-files-detailed-match-results.png
[biohansel-output-files]: images/biohansel-output-files.png
[biohansel-provenance]: images/biohansel-provenance.png
[biohansel-provenance-tools]: images/biohansel-provenance-tools.png
[biohansel-settings-samples]: images/biohansel-settings-samples.png
[biohansel-settings]: images/biohansel-settings.png
[biohansel-settings-delete]: images/biohansel-settings-delete.png
[biohansel-settings-edit-name]: images/biohansel-settings-edit-name.png
[biohansel-settings-share]: images/biohansel-settings-share.png
[biohansel-share-save-results]: images/biohansel-share-save-results.png
[biohansel-pipeline-page]: images/biohansel-pipeline-page.png
[biohansel-pipeline-params]: images/biohansel-pipeline-params.png
[biohansel-provenance]: images/biohansel-provenance.png
[biohansel-provenance-tools]: images/biohansel-provenance-tools.png
[biohansel-results]: images/biohansel-results.png
[cart-button]: images/cart-button.png
[delete-analysis]: images/delete-analysis.png
[docs]: ../../user/bio_hansel/
[forward reads]: ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR120/002/SRR1203042/SRR1203042_1.fastq.gz
[launch-button]: ../../../images/tutorials/common/pipelines/ready-to-launch-button.png
[monitor-analyses]: images/monitor-analyses.png
[pipeline-launched]: images/pipeline-launched.png
[pipeline-select]: images/pipeline-select.png
[reverse reads]: ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR120/002/SRR1203042/SRR1203042_2.fastq.gz
[SRR1203042]: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/SRR1203042&display=html
[view-your-analyses]: images/view-your-analyses.png
[Web Upload Tutorial]: ../web-upload/
